[page 1]
Byzantine-Resilient Federated Learning via
QUBO-Based Client Selection on Quantum
Annealers
Andras Ferenczi1, Sutapa Samanta 1, Dagen Wang1, and Jason Qizhe Qin 2
1 American Express Co., USA
2 Columbia University, USA
Abstract.Federated Learning (FL) is a well-established method for
training a global model in a decentralized fashion, thus preserving the
privacy of local data and eliminating the need for large centralized in-
frastructure. FL at scale runs the risk of malicious updates that can
impact the global model. To mitigate such risks, a number of Byzantine-
resilient aggregation methods have been introduced, one of the most
popular ones being MultiKrum. Whereas this method scores the indi-
vidual gradients against their nearest neighbors, it can easily miss mali-
cious updates that preserve the statistical properties of honest updates.
To mitigate such concerns, we propose a quantum annealing approach
that reformulates client selection as a Quadratic Unconstrained Binary
Optimization (QUBO) problem, encoding pairwise distances into a cost
function solved by quantum annealers (QA). Unlike MultiKrum’s greedy
per-client scoring, the QUBO formulation jointly optimizes over all pos-
sible client subsets to find the mutually closest group ofmclients. Our
experiments at small scale consisting of 15 clients provided promising
results for the most challenging Byzantine attacks. For example, the
Advanced LIE attack was detected with 95.11% accuracy with QUBO
versus 81.33% for classical MultiKrum on an MNIST-trained model and
97.78% vs. 75.56% on CIFAR-10. Whereas our QUBO method performs
well against sophisticated attacks, it fares poorly against simpler attacks,
which are handled well by classical MultiKrum. Our experiments show
that the two methods complement each other well. Additionally, the
QUBO method’s quality degrades as we increase the number of clients.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce a MultiSignal ensemble
that uses a dual-feature routing gate based on Euclidean and cosine
Krum score gaps to classify attacks into four regimes and routes eva-
sion attacks to a suspicion-penalized QUBO with agreement voting. The
MultiSignal ensemble performs better than classical MultiKrum in all
our experiments, with 95.3% average detection accuracy versus 91.8%
for classical. The largest gains are achieved on Sparse Lie, where detec-
tion accuracy improves from 72.0% to 95.2%, a 23.2 percentage-point
gain, and on Advanced Lie, where it increases from 80.4% to 85.2%, a
4.8 percentage-point gain. These results demonstrate that QUBO-based
quantum annealing with the MultiSignal ensemble is a principled and
scalable defense against the most challenging Byzantine strategies in fed-
erated learning.

[page 2]
2 A. Ferenczi et al.
Keywords:Federated Learning·Byzantine Robustness·Quantum An-
nealing·QUBO·MultiKrum·Client Selection
