4 Methodology
We aim to replace the greedy MultiKrum algorithm with a method that holis-
tically selects the most optimal subset based on the QUBO objectives and con-
straints.
4.1 Step 1: Gradient Dimension Reduction
The first step is to project a very large gradient vectorsG i ∈R d into a
lower-dimensional space with dimensionk. We use Importance-Weighted ap-
proach for this purpose. For each coordinatej, we compute the variance
vj = Var({G1,j,...,G n,j}) across clients. We then select the top-kcoordinates
by variance. This preserves dimensions where clients disagree most. Letp i∈R k
denotes the selected gradient for clientiafter applying such dimension reduction.

[page 5]
Byzantine-Resilient FL via QUBO-Based Client Selection 5
4.2 Step 2: Distance Matrix Computation
Next, we compute a pairwise distance matrixD∈R n×n on the gradients with
reduced dimension. We use two type of distance computation, cosine and Eu-
clidean. The cosine distance is computed as follows:
Dcosine
ij = 1− pi·p j
∥pi∥∥p j∥+ϵ ,(5)
Hereϵ= 10 −8 prevents division by zero. Cosine distance measures directional
dissimilarity and is invariant to gradient magnitude, making it well-suited for
detecting attacks that preserve gradient norms but alter directions. The matrix
is symmetric withD cosine
ii = 0. One the other hand, the Euclidean distance
captures the magnitude dissimilarity which is calculated as follows:
Deuclid
ij =∥p i−p j∥2.(6)
For the dual-distance formulation (Section 4.4), the Euclidean matrix is normal-
ized to [0,1]:
ˆDeuclid
ij = Deuclid
ij
maxk<lDeuclid
kl
.(7)
4.3 Step 3: QUBO Formulation
Letx i ∈{0,1}indicates whether clientiis selected. We seek to selectm=
n−fclients whose projected gradients are mutually closest. Our objective is to
minimize the total pairwise distance among selected clients, i.e.,
min
x∈{0,1}n
nX
i=1


nX
j=1
Dij

xi−2
X
i<j
Dijxixj.(8)
To enforce exactlymselections, we add a Lagrange penalty of the form:
λ
 nX
i=1
xi−m
!2
,(9)
whereλis the Lagrange multiplier. We set the valueλ= 10×max i,jDij, en-
suring the constraint penalty dominates the objective when violated. Expanding
Eq. (8), and Eq. (9) and using the property of binary variables,x 2
i =x i, andm 2
is a constant term, irrelevant to the optimization, the elements of QUBO can be
written as follows:
Qii =
nX
j=1
Dij +λ(1−2m),(10)
Qij =−2D ij + 2λ,fori<j.(11)

[page 6]
6 A. Ferenczi et al.
We solve the QUBO using a simulated annealing sampler with 1000 reads
and extract client indicesSfor small instances. If|S|̸=mwe perform post-
processing to add or remove clients based on their distance sums to the current
selection. The global model is updated as:
Wt+1 =W t +η· 1
|S|
X
i∈S
Gi.(12)
4.4 Cascaded Dual-QUBO
For large client populations (n≥100), the solution above faces scaling issues and
there is a higher likelihood that Byzantine updates cluster tightly thus confusing
our optimization algorithm. We attempt to resolve this using a Cascaded Dual-
QUBO approach. We define Krum score gap∆as follows:
∆= mini∈Rsi−max j∈Ssj
std({s1,...,s n}) ,(13)
whereSandRare the selected and rejected client sets under that metric’s Krum
scoring, ands i is the Krum score for clienti. We introduce a gap thresholdτ.
When Euclidean Krum score gap is above this threshold, classical MultiKrum
is good enough. When the gap is below the threshold, classical method fails.
In that case we build a QUBO using equal blend of normalized Euclidean and
cosine distances defined as follows:
Ddual
ij =α ˆDeuclid
ij + (1−α)D cosine
ij ,(14)
where ˆDeuclid is the Euclidean distance matrix normalized to [0,1] andα= 0.5.
Then solve it using BQM hybrid quantum annealing solver.
4.5 MultiSignal Ensemble
Our initial Cascaded Dual-QUBO approach for 100 client instances, however,
did not work for ALIE. We address this concern with MultiSignal ensemble that
comprises of a dual-feature routing gate, a suspicion-penalized QUBO, and and
an agreement voting.
Stage 1: Dual-Feature Routing GateWe compute the normalized Euclidean
Krum score gap∆ E on full gradients and the normalized cosine Krum score gap
∆C on importance-weighted projected gradients using Eq. (13). We also define
cutoffsτ c andτ E for cosine and Euclidean gap respectively. Based on these two
gap values we categorize the outcomes as follows: (1) Outlier when∆ E > τE
and∆ C > τE, (2) Clustered when∆ E ≤τ E and∆ C > τC, (3) Magnitude
when∆ E > τE and∆ C≤τ E, and (4) Evasion when∆ E≤τ E and∆ C≤τ E.
For the first three categories, classical multi-Kurm works well. For the fourth
category, both the gaps are low and a suspicion-penalized QUBO with agreement

[page 7]
Byzantine-Resilient FL via QUBO-Based Client Selection 7
voting is more beneficial. Based on extensive experimentation we settled with
τE = 0.2 andτ C = 0.5. In our experiments we were unable to produce Outlier
and Clustered scenarios. These are hypothetical scenarios for future-proofing our
system.
Stage 2: Suspicion-Penalized QUBOWhile the standard QUBO objective
in Eq. (8) encourages client mutual proximity, it cannot detect ALIE in which
gradients are extremely close to the honest mean. Suspicion-Penalized QUBO
discourages selecting pairs of clients whose gradients are suspiciously similar.
First, we construct a dual distance matrix on importance-weighted projected
gradients following Eq. (14). The suspicion thresholdτ s isp-th percentile of the
upper-triangular entries ofD dual, withp= 10. The modified quadratic coeffi-
cients become:
Qsusp
ij =−2D dual
ij +w s·max(0, τs−D dual
ij ),(15)
wherew s = 10.0 is the suspicion weight. For pairs withD dual
ij <τ s, the penalty
term overpowers the incentive.
Stage 3: Agreement VotingIn the evasion regime we run both classical Mul-
tiKrum and QUBO in parallel. As both Euclidean and cosine gaps are low, clas-
sical is given a low confidence. We produce four categories:agreed-acceptwhen
both methods select,agreed-rejectwhen both methods reject,QUBO-onlywhen
QUBO selects but classical rejects, andclassical-onlywhen classical selects but
QUBO rejects. A blended rank score based on normalized cosine Krum scores,
with bonuses for agreed-accept and penalties for agreed-reject and classical-only,
determines the final selection ofmclients. Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete
procedure.
